# ktransw
v0.2.4

A wrapper around Fanuc Robotics' command-line Karel translator (`ktrans.exe`)
that makes it work a little more like a modern compiler by adding some missing
functionality (like support for multiple include paths and dependency file
generation).

As of v0.2.4 support for FANUC dictionaries and forms has been added to support preprocessor directives, multiple include paths, and functionality to build using [rossum][].

## Installation

1. Install Git & Python
2. (optional) Create a python virtual environment `python -m venv <name>`
3. Clone the repo `git clone https://github.com/kobbled/ktransw_py` to a user specified directory. If using an python virtual environment this can be cloned within your venv is you so choose.
4. Run the install file in a powershell terminal, with the optional argument specifying the path to your created venv.
```powershell
. ./install.ps1 <path\to\venv>
```

Alternatively a convenience distribution for [Rossum](https://github.com/kobbled/rossum) can be downloaded and installed, which includes `ktransw`. Goto https://github.com/kobbled/rossum/releases for details.

If `ktransw`, and `kcdictw`it is not on the `PATH`, its location must be provided by using the `--ktrans` command line option with each invocation.

</br>

> [!**NOTE**]
>
> On windows machines the `python` alias can be overwritten by the py launcher where python is started in the terminal with `py -3`. The batch files are written with the `python` key. To create the alias type this into powershell:
> ```powershell
> Set-Alias -Name python -Value "path\to\Python\Python39\python.exe"
> ```
> replacing the value with the full path to the python executable in your PATH environment variables.

</br>

> [!**WARNING**]
>
> If you installed ktransw with the _"install.ps1"_ script the steps in [Requirements](https://github.com/kobbled/ktransw_py#Requirements), and [Dependencies](https://github.com/kobbled/ktransw_py#Dependencies) are not needed. If you are trying to setup in a linux/unix environment follow the steps below.

</br>

## Requirements

`ktransw` was written in Python 3. Python dependencies can be installed with
```python
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

The script itself requires the the Fanuc tool **ktrans.exe** to compile the code into a binary form for the robot controller to read. **ktrans.exe** should be installed with a copy of **Roboguide** or **OLPCPro**. The standard location of the Fanuc tools is `C:\Program Files (x86)\FANUC\WinOLPC\bin`. Make sure this is on your environment `Path` if you run into troubles.

A robot workcell also needs to be created in **Roboguide**, or **OLPCPro** in order to operate. See the manual for Fanuc Roboguide for details. Once a workcell has been created, and _robot.ini_ file needs to be generated. The _robot.ini_ file is a set of file pointers to tell the **ktrans** compiler where to look and gather resources during compilation. The _robot.ini_ file can be generated by typing `setrobot` into a terminal, and selecting the appropriate workcell. The  _robot.ini_ file should be in the root directory where the karel code you are trying to compile lives.

## Dependencies

`ktransw` relies heavily on the [GPP Preprocessor](https://github.com/logological/gpp). A prebuilt **.exe** is supplied in _"./deps/gpp"_. Simply add the location of the exe file to your environment `Path` to use. If the supplied **.exe** file does not work on your machine, or if it needs to be upgraded, please follow the compilation guide for windows: [./deps/gpp/WINDOWS_SOURCE_BUILD_README.md](./deps/gpp/WINDOWS_SOURCE_BUILD_README.md)


## Usage

```
usage: ktransw [-h] [-v] [-q] [-d] [-E] [-M] [-MM] [-MT target] [-MF file]
               [-MG] [-MP] [--ktrans PATH] [--gpp PATH] [-I PATH]
               [ARG [ARG ...]]

Version 0.2.3

A wrapper around Fanuc Robotics' command-line Karel translator (ktrans.exe)
that adds a C-like preprocessor, support for multiple include directories,
conditional compilation, include guards, macros and more.

positional arguments:
  ARG                   Arguments to pass on to ktrans. Use normal (forward-
                        slash) notation here

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -v, --verbose         Print (lots of) debug information
  -q, --quiet           Print nothing, except when ktrans encounters an error
  -d, --dry-run         Do nothing, except checking parameters
  -E                    Preprocess only; do not translate
  -M                    Output GCC compatible dependency file
  -MM                   Like '-M', but don't include system headers
  -MT target            Change the target of the rule emitted by dependency
                        generation (default: base name of source, with object
                        extension (.pc))
  -MF file              When used with -M or -MM, specifies a file to write the
                        dependencies to.
  -MG                   Assume missing header files are generated files and add them
                        to the dependency list without raising an error
  -MP                   Add a phony target for each dependency to support renaming
                        dependencies without having to update the Makefile to match
  -k, --keep-build-dir  Don't delete the temporary build directory on exit
  --ktrans PATH         Location of ktrans (by default ktransw assumes it's on the
                        Windows PATH)
  --gpp PATH            Location of gpp (by default ktransw assumes it's on the
                        Windows PATH)
  -I PATH               Include paths (multiple allowed)
  -D  /D                Define user macros from command line
  /config               Location of the workcells robot.ini file

Example invocation:

  ktransw /IC:\foo\bar\include /IC:\baz\include C:\my_prog.kl /config robot.ini

All arguments using forward-slash notation (except '/I') are passed on
to ktrans.
```


## Examples

### As ktrans stand-in

`ktransw` is supposed to be a transparent wrapper around `ktrans.exe`. Refer
for more information on the use of `ktrans.exe` to the relevant Fanuc Robotics
manuals.

See also [rossum][].

### Using the pre-processor

See the [gpp documentation][] for more information.

## \%class pre-processor directive

Object construction or generic templating can be achieved with the \%class
directive, and proper formatting:

```
%class <class-name>('<class-file>.klc','<class-header>.klh','<template-file>.klt')
```

**Note** : the *.klt* file is optional, used for creating generic templates but is 
not needed for creating a class.

See [bank_class] test in [rossum_example_ws](https://github.com/kobbled/rossum_example_ws) 
to see how to format classes.

**Note** : Take note of the usage of instances of `class_name`. This is a pre-processor
macro that will be replaced with the class name defined in %class for each object.

In *ktransw* objects are first created with pure gpp:

```
%defeval class_name <class-name>
%include <template-file>.klt
%include <class-file>.klc
```

Running these files through a few cycles of GPP will flatten and replace preprocessor
directives with their defined karel code. The user is responsible for managing the 
namespacing and scoping of members/attributes. The user can do this as they wish by defining 
multiple header files, one for usage only in **\%class**, and another for outside of the 
object instantantiation to give member visibility to the main program. The user can also 
choose to follow the method in [bank_class] which leverages a third party package [ktransw-macros]. 
The only thing that is required is that `class_name` is included in the *.klc*, and *.klh* 
file for each routine, and program definition so that they resolve to the same definition as 
outside of the class scope.

**Note** : If you are building to roboguide < v9.10, you might have a 12 character limit for
definitions. In this case it is advisable to use [ktransw-macros], and the \<class_name\>\_\_\<function\>
namespacing technique, giving short alias names to each function.

**Note** : Processing of **\%class** directives assumes extensive use of GPP mode:

```
%mode string QQQ "`" "`" "\\"
```

Using specifically the **\`** char for defining multi-line GPP functions to comply with the
current GPP syntax definition:

```python
'+z',       # Set text mode to Unix mode (LF terminator)

'--includemarker "-- INCLUDE_MARKER %:%:%"',
          # line:file:op

'-U',       # User-defined mode
'""',       # the macro start sequence
'""',       # the macro end sequence for a call without arguments
'"("',      # the argument start sequence
'","',      # the argument separator
'")"',      # the argument end sequence
'"("',      # the list of characters to stack for argument balancing
'")"',      # the list of characters to unstack
'"#"',      # the string to be used for referring to an argument by number
'""',       # and finally the quote character (escapes embedded string chars)

'-M',       # User-defined mode specifications for meta-macros
'"\\n%\w"', # the macro start sequence
'"\\n"',    # the macro end sequence for a call without arguments
'" "',      # the argument start sequence
'" "',      # the argument separator
'"\\n"',    # the argument end sequence
'""',       # the list of characters to stack for argument balancing
'""',       # and the list of characters to unstack
```

This is done as a return character cannot be used to seperate a pre-processor function
without conflicting with karel. The **\`** string mode is incorperated into *ktransw* 
in order to dispose of the leftover **\`** chars to resolve nested macros.

## \%from \<file-name\> \%import <function>, <function>, etc...

A _"from/import"_ custom directive similar to that in python is included with ktransw. This is done to decrease cross dependencies between your files by copying the full headers of each repository. If a header routine definition gets changed you may find you cannot load the program back onto the controller. This is because another program think that this program has a different routine definition. To get the program to load back on the controller you must first delete all the programs with a reference to the changed routine. Using _"from/import"_ will limit these conflicts, and make then easier to find.

the _%include_ preprocessor directive will simply copy the file contents into the current file. If you use the karel directive _%INCLUDE_, this will defer inclusion to the karel compiler which may work easier, however doesn't support macros, or different file specifications (i.e. .klt, .klh, .klc)
## user macros

Pre-processor macros can be defined from the command line invoking **-D***name=val*, or **/D***name=val*. See [GPP documentation][GPP].

## kcdictw

A wrapper tool for kcdict is also included in this package called `kcdictw`. This tool will compress the **.ftx**, or **.utx** dictionary
file into the temp directory, %TEMP%, and copy over the output **.tx**, **.vr** into the working directory, and the **.kl** karel include file into the root directory of the **.ftx** or **.utx** file. If you would like to keep the other **.ftx** files created by kcdict, use the **--keep-build-dir** option as to not delete the temp folder, where yo u can manually copy over the files after.


## Disclaimer

WinOLPC, OlpcPRO and Roboguide are products of Fanuc America Corporation. The
author of `ktransw` is not affiliated with Fanuc in any way.

[releases]: https://github.com/gavanderhoorn/ktransw_py/releases
[gpp releases]: https://github.com/gavanderhoorn/gpp/releases
[rossum]: https://github.com/gavanderhoorn/rossum
[gpp documentation]: https://logological.org/gpp
[fr_hdrs]: https://github.com/gavanderhoorn/fr_hdrs
[bank_class]: https://github.com/kobbled/rossum_example_ws/tree/master/src/bank_class
[ktransw-macros]: https://github.com/kobbled/ktransw-macros
